# Single-cell transcriptomics reveals immune landscape dynamics in metastatic hormone receptor-positive breast cancer treated with abemaciclib and endocrine therapy

The integration of cyclin-dependent kinase 4 and 6 inhibitors (CDK4/6i) with endocrine therapy (ET) has transformed the treatment of estrogen receptor-positive (ER+), human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative (HER2-) breast cancer. In advanced disease, the combination of CDK4/6i with ET is the standard of care in the first-line setting. While CDK4/6i were initially developed to induce cell cycle arrest, it is becoming increasingly evident that CDK4/6i also have the potential to regulate the tumor immune microenvironment (TIME). Here, we use single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) to characterize the immune landscape and the immunomodulatory effects of the CDK4/6i, abemaciclib, and ET in matched-pair advanced and metastatic ER+/HER2- breast tumor biopsies (NCT04352777) before and after treatment. Our data reveal complex and functionally heterogeneous myeloid subpopulations in advanced breast tumors. Expression of genes associated with antigen presentation were broadly upregulated in tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) and dendritic cells following treatment. We identify a population of TREM2+ lipid TAMs that decrease in relative proportion following treatment with abemaciclib and ET. We show that lower expression of the TREM2+ TAM signature is significantly associated with improved overall survival in breast cancer patients. These data provide critical insights into the immunomodulatory impact of CDK4/6i and ET on both lymphoid and myeloid lineages within the TIME of advanced and metastatic ER+/HER2- breast cancer. 

The code contained in this repository was used to generate the figures associated with the manuscript submitted to Cancer Discovery. Raw data are accessible through dbGap.
